.TH RAMSTEIN 1 "2026-07-20" "ramstein 0.8.0" "ramstein manual"
.SH NAME
ramstein \- verb CLI for the ramstein memory daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ramstein
.RI [ verb ]
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ramstein
talks to
.BR ramsteind (8)
over its control socket and prints the answer. With no verb, it runs
.BR status .
Every verb accepts
.B \-\-json
for machine-readable output.
.SH VERBS
.TP
.B status
Available memory, PSI pressure, burn rate, and ETA-to-OOM.
.TP
.B top " [\-\-swap] [\-\-limit N]"
Live per-process RSS, ranked (or swap-ranked with
.BR \-\-swap ).
.I N
defaults to 20, clamped 1\(en1000.
.TP
.B blame " [\-\-since T] [\-\-limit N]"
What grew in RSS since
.IR T ,
a join of two index samples: grown, new (absent from the base sample), or
gone (absent from the latest \(em shown as freed, negative).
.I T
is
.IR Ns / Nm / Nh / Nd
or
.IR YYYY-MM-DD ;
defaults to
.IR 10m .
.TP
.B swap " [\-\-limit N]"
Who's parked in swap, VmSwap descending.
.TP
.B zombies
Defunct processes and the parent not reaping them. Reads live
.IR /proc ,
not the index \(em zombies are a now-question.
.TP
.B oom
Risk snapshot (available/PSI/burn/ETA) plus the top 5 kill candidates by
the kernel's own
.IR /proc/<pid>/oom_score .
Read-only.
.TP
.B advise
One-line nudges: sustained pressure, a fast RSS grower, swap over half
full, unreaped zombies, another OOM-fighter active, ETA under an hour.
.TP
.BI calm " target " "[\-\-high SIZE|\-\-release|\-\-nice N|\-\-kill]"
The gentle levers, and the one ungentle one.
.I target
is a pid or an exact comm name \(em an ambiguous comm (more than one
matching process, routinely true for chrome/postgres/python) refuses with
the candidate list; pass a pid instead.
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-high " SIZE"
Write the target's cgroup
.I memory.high
to
.I SIZE
(e.g.
.IR 500M ", " 2G ).
Clamped to
.RI [ 64M ", " MemTotal ]
and to at least 1.1x the target's current RSS \(em a size can never be
set low enough to instant-thrash-OOM the process it's meant to calm.
.TP
.B \-\-release
Clear
.I memory.high
back to
.IR max .
.TP
.BI \-\-nice " N"
Renice the target,
.I N
clamped 0\(en19 \(em
.B calm
only ever lowers priority, never raises it.
.TP
.B \-\-kill
SIGTERM, then an optional SIGKILL if the process is still alive 5 seconds
later. Requires a fresh interactive confirmation typed at a real TTY \(em
.B ramstein
prints the target's pid and comm and asks you to type the pid back. No
.BR \-\-yes ,
no environment override, no non-interactive path: a script piping
.B \-\-kill
is refused outright, every time, on purpose.
.RE
.TP
.BI autocalm " status|arm|dry|run"
Arms
.B calm
to act on its own, on a timer \(em never kill. Three independent gates,
all required before it acts for real: config
.RI ( auto_calm_enabled ,
off by default), the runtime armed state below (always resets to
disarmed/dry-run on every daemon restart), and the
.B ramstein\-autocalm.timer
unit being manually enabled
.RI ( systemctl " " enable " " \-\-now ).
.RS
.TP
.B status
Current enabled/armed state, policy thresholds, and the last cycle's
outcome.
.TP
.B arm
Lets the next triggered cycle act for real (renice and/or a cgroup
.I memory.high
squeeze on the top RSS grower). Requires a real TTY and typing
.B arm
to confirm \(em lighter than
.BR \-\-kill 's
gate since every autocalm step is reversible, but never a bare flag.
.TP
.B dry
Back to disarmed \(em cycles keep computing and notifying, never acting.
.TP
.B run
Runs one check-and-maybe-act cycle immediately (what
.B ramstein\-autocalm.timer
calls periodically once enabled). Useful on demand to see what a cycle
would do.
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX
$ ramstein status
ramstein v0.5.0   (status 0s old)
 ! mem 45.2G available of 61.2G   swap 5.1G free of 8.0G   pressure some 0.0/full 0.0   burn 9.8M/s   OOM ~87m

$ ramstein top \-\-limit 3
top by rss   (sample 10s ago)
     RSS     SWAP       PID  PROC
  671.7M       0B    515128    claude
  645.5M       0B   2311838    python3
  640.9M       0B   1552474    claude

$ ramstein blame \-\-since 5m \-\-limit 3
RSS movers over the last 5m:
  +  645.5M  python3          pid 2311838 (now 645.5M) new
  +  329.2M  chrome\-headless  pid 2312307 (now 329.2M) new
  +  230.0M  nautilus         pid 2291973 (now 230.0M) new

$ ramstein oom
available 45.2G of 61.2G   pressure some 0.0/full 0.0   burn 9.8M/s   OOM ~87m
who dies first (by oom_score):
    870    390.0M   2312307  chrome\-headless
    869    294.8M   2274175  chrome

$ ramstein advise
\- 2 zombie(s) unreaped \(em warp\-terminal isn't reaping (2 of them)
\- systemd\-oomd is active \(em RAMstein's kill prompts stay advisory\-only, standing down

$ ramstein calm 2312307 \-\-nice 10
! systemd\-oomd is active \(em proceeding, but it may already be handling this
chrome\-headless (pid 2312307): nice \-> 10

$ ramstein autocalm status
auto\-calm: enabled=False  armed=False
  trigger: PSI some > 20.0% or full > 10.0% or swap storm
  steps: renice+squeeze  (nice=15, squeeze to 130% rss, cooldown 300s)
  no cycles run yet
.EE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /run/ramstein/status.json
The read seam \(em memory, swap, pressure, burn, ETA, and the M2/M3 pill
digest. Mode 0640.
.TP
.I /run/ramstein/control.sock
The command socket. Mode 0660, peercred-gated.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RAMSTEIN_RUNTIME_DIR
Overrides
.I /run/ramstein
(status.json and control.sock live here). Used for testing.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Non-zero if the daemon is unreachable, or if the daemon answers with an
error (bad arguments, ambiguous target, refused kill, etc.) \(em the
message explains why.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ramsteind (8),
.BR ramstein\-healthcheck (1),
.BR ramstein\-update (1)
.SH AUTHOR
asuramaya and RAMstein contributors.
