'\" t
.TH RAMSTEIND 8 "2026-07-20" "ramstein 0.8.0" "ramstein manual"
.SH NAME
ramsteind \- the ramstein memory daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ramsteind
.RB [ \-\-config
.IR path ]
.RB [ \-\-once ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ramsteind
is the only privileged actor in ramstein: it owns the truth about bytes
alive \(em
.IR /proc/meminfo " + " /proc/pressure/memory
polling, EWMA burn rate, ETA-to-OOM, a per-process sqlite index, and the
gentle (and one ungentle) levers
.BR ramstein (1)'s
.I calm
verb acts through. Nothing above the control socket ever needs privilege
to read; writing (cgroup
.IR memory.high ,
renice, kill) does.
.PP
.B \-\-once
performs a single poll, writes
.IR status.json ,
and exits \(em used by
.B make smoke
and testing.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Config is the seed, never the master: every key is typed and clamped on
load; unknown keys are ignored; a tampered config can tune numbers within
the ranges below but can never grant the daemon a new ability or weaken
an invariant \(em the kill gate, the coexistence check, and the memory.high
RSS floor are hardcoded, not configurable. Default path:
.IR /etc/ramstein/config.json .
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb lb
l l l.
key@default@clamp
poll_interval@10@1\(en3600
burn_tau@120@5\(en86400
eta_cap_hours@24.0@0.1\(en8760
warn_psi_some@10.0@0\(en100
warn_avail_pct@15.0@0\(en100
warn_eta_hours@4.0@0.01\(en8760
hot_psi_full@5.0@0\(en100
hot_avail_pct@5.0@0\(en100
hot_eta_minutes@30.0@0.1\(en525600
owner_uid@1000@0\(en2^31
sample_every@3@1\(en360
proc_min_bytes@16MiB@1MiB\(en2^40
recent_ring@120@2\(en100000
hourly_ring@168@2\(en100000
advise_growth_mib_per_hour@500.0@1\(en1000000
swap_storm_eta_minutes@10.0@0.1\(en1440
swap_storm_hysteresis_polls@3@1\(en60
zombie_advise_min@3@1\(en100000
auto_calm_enabled@false@bool
auto_calm_psi_some@20.0@0\(en100
auto_calm_psi_full@10.0@0\(en100
auto_calm_use_swap_storm@true@bool
auto_calm_step_renice@true@bool
auto_calm_step_squeeze@true@bool
auto_calm_nice@15@0\(en19
auto_calm_squeeze_pct@130.0@110\(en500
auto_calm_cooldown_seconds@300.0@30\(en86400
.TE
.PP
Units are seconds unless named otherwise.
.I sample_every
is poll ticks between M2 samples;
.I proc_min_bytes
is the rss+swap floor a process must clear to earn an index row;
.I recent_ring
/
.I hourly_ring
are sample counts kept in each ring;
.I advise_growth_mib_per_hour
is rule 2's leak-ish growth-rate threshold;
.I swap_storm_eta_minutes
/
.I swap_storm_hysteresis_polls
govern V2.M1's early warning (see
.B WARNING
below);
.I zombie_advise_min
is how many unreaped children one parent needs before
.I advise
names it;
the
.I auto_calm_*
keys are V2.M2's policy \(em see
.B AUTO\-CALM
below.
.I auto_calm_enabled
is the master switch; even armed (see
.BR ramstein (1)'s
.I autocalm
verb) and even with
.B ramstein\-autocalm.timer
enabled, a cycle does nothing while this is false.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/ramstein/config.json
Seeded once at install (owner_uid from the installing sudo call), never
overwritten on reinstall.
.TP
.I /var/lib/ramstein/index.db
The per-process sample ring (sqlite, WAL mode): two rings sharing one
promoted flag \(em
.I recent_ring
keeps every sample (~1h at defaults),
.I hourly_ring
keeps one promoted sample per hour (~7d). Identity key is
.RI ( pid ", " starttime )
so a reused pid can never be mistaken for the process that held it before.
.TP
.I /var/lib/ramstein/ledger.jsonl
One JSON line per
.I calm
or
.I kill
action: timestamp, verb, pid, comm, argument, result.
.TP
.I /run/ramstein/status.json
0640, owned by
.IR owner_uid .
Written atomically (tmp file + rename). Carries the M2/M3 pill digest
(top process, zombie count, one advise headline) for the GNOME extension,
recomputed on the sampler's own cadence; V2.M1's
.I warning
field (swap-storm, when active) and V2.M2's
.I autocalm
field (armed state, last cycle) ride along on every poll.
.TP
.I /run/ramstein/control.sock
0660, owned by
.IR owner_uid .
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGTERM, SIGINT
Clean shutdown: the current poll loop iteration finishes, the socket is
closed.
.SH WARNING (V2.M1 \(em swap-storm early warning)
A second EWMA tracks swap consumption specifically (independent of the
main burn EWMA). When it's actively growing
.I and
the combined ETA-to-OOM crosses
.IR swap_storm_eta_minutes ,
.I status.json
gains a
.I warning
object
.RI ( kind ": " swap_storm ", " eta_oom_seconds ", " swap_burn_bps ", "
.IR top_growers ,
the top-3 processes by swap delta over a recent window). It's sticky:
.I swap_storm_hysteresis_polls
consecutive clear polls are required before it drops, so a value hovering
right at the horizon doesn't flap the pill on and off. This catches a gap
the general avail%/PSI/eta classifier can miss \(em
.I MemAvailable
is a reclaimable-cache-aware kernel heuristic that can look fine for a
while even as swap visibly drains.
.SH AUTO-CALM (V2.M2)
Arms
.BR ramstein (1)'s
.I calm
machinery to act on its own, on a timer. Three independent gates, all
required before anything real happens \(em see
.B Auto\-calm
under
.B SECURITY
below for the full model. Trigger: PSI some/full avg10 crossing
.IR auto_calm_psi_some / auto_calm_psi_full ,
or (when
.I auto_calm_use_swap_storm
is true) an active swap-storm warning. Graduated response against the
current top RSS grower, each step independently toggleable:
.IR auto_calm_step_renice " (to " auto_calm_nice ")"
then
.IR auto_calm_step_squeeze " (cgroup " memory.high " to "
.I auto_calm_squeeze_pct
percent of the target's current RSS \(em always at least 110%, since
.I calm \-\-high's
own floor never allows less and a lower request would silently be a
no-op; the default headroom lets the target keep running while capping
how much further it can grow).
.I auto_calm_cooldown_seconds
rate-limits how often a cycle can act for real. There is no step past
squeeze \(em the daemon never kills anything on its own, at any setting;
it only ever surfaces a suggested
.I calm \-\-kill
command for a human to run.
.SH SECURITY
The relevant attacker is an unprivileged local process abusing the root
daemon; ramsteind has no network attack surface at all \(em the only
component that ever reaches the internet is the separate, unprivileged
.BR ramstein\-update (1)
checker.
.TP
.B Socket
AF_UNIX, newline-delimited JSON, bounded reads (4 KiB line cap, 5 s
timeout). Every connection is checked against
.B SO_PEERCRED
\(em only root or the configured
.I owner_uid
may issue commands \(em on top of the socket's own 0660 file mode. Two
independent gates.
.TP
.B Hostile input
Malformed JSON, non-objects, and unknown commands are answered with
.RI { \(dqerror\(dq : ...} and the connection ends; they never crash the
daemon.
.TP
.B The kill gate
Nothing is killed without a fresh, per-invocation confirmation typed at a
real TTY \(em no config flag, no persisting
.BR \-\-yes ,
no non-interactive kill path; a non-TTY stdin is refused outright by the
CLI before it ever reaches the socket. The daemon independently
re-validates
.RI ( pid ", " starttime )
identity against live
.I /proc
before signaling \(em a stale or reused pid is refused even if the CLI
layer were somehow bypassed. PID 1, kernel threads, and the daemon's own
pid are never valid targets, hardcoded, not configurable.
.TP
.B Auto\-calm
Three independent gates, all required before a cycle acts for real \(em
config
.RI ( auto_calm_enabled ,
off by default), the runtime armed state (toggled only by
.BR ramstein (1)'s
.I autocalm arm / dry
\(em armed always resets to disarmed/dry-run on every daemon restart, the
same discipline as the kill gate never trusting a remembered confirmation
across a process boundary), and
.B ramstein\-autocalm.timer
being manually enabled (installed, not enabled, same as
.BR ramstein\-update.timer ).
Kill is never reachable from an auto-calm cycle at any setting \(em the
graduated response stops at a desktop notification naming the one
.I calm \-\-kill
command it will not run itself.
.TP
.B The memory.high floor
.I calm \-\-high
clamps its target to at least 1.1x the process's own current RSS \(em a
tampered or fat-fingered size can never be set low enough to
instant-thrash-OOM the process it's meant to calm.
.TP
.B Coexistence
If systemd-oomd or earlyoom is already active, every
.I calm
action and
.I advise
say so; RAMstein never races another OOM-fighter \(em its kill prompts
stay advisory information, not an automatic stand-down of the action
itself (that decision is still yours, and still requires the same TTY
confirmation).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ramstein (1),
.BR ramstein\-healthcheck (1),
.BR systemd.exec (5)
.SH AUTHOR
asuramaya and RAMstein contributors.
